= Folksemantic
Folksemantic is a search,recommendation and social system for helping users engage with one another and content from OpenCourseware, 
the NSDL and various other repositories that focus on Open Educational Content.

== Installation
Folksemantic requires a standard Ruby on Rails stack as well as a Java installation to function correctly.  
Detailed instructions on how to deploy Folksemantic including
setting up ruby, ruby on rails, and java can be found in INSTALL.rdoc.

=== Setup global config
Copy config/global_config.yml.example to config/global_config.yml and edit it to reflect your application customized configurations.

=== Setup production environment
Copy config/environments/production.rb.example to config/environments/production.rb and edit `asset_host` in order to reflect the 
name of the production asset server.

=== Capistrano
An example file for Capistrano deployment can be found in config/deploy.example.rb.  Copy that file to config/deploy.rb.
This file was taken from an EngineYard example file and will need to be modified for your specific server configuration.

=== Install the required gems

All the gems are hosted on gemcutter so set it up first:
  sudo gem install gemcutter

rake gems:install won't work because the gems are included in the project's Rakefile. Instead copy and paste the code below into your command line. 
It will take a while to install all the gems. 
I recommend getting a tasty beverage and surfing the net while you wait for this to complete.
  sudo gem install will_paginate
  sudo gem install jrails
  sudo gem install authlogic
  sudo gem install searchlogic
  sudo gem install bcrypt-ruby
  sudo gem install acts-as-taggable-on
  sudo gem install paperclip
  sudo gem install awesome_nested_set
  sudo gem install friendly_id
  sudo gem install sanitize
  sudo gem install recaptcha
  sudo gem install newrelic_rpm
  sudo gem install feedzirra
  sudo gem install tiny_mce
  sudo gem install facebooker
  sudo gem install action_mailer_tls
  sudo gem install aasm
  sudo gem install geokit
  sudo gem install httparty -v0.4.5
  sudo gem install oauth
  sudo gem install oauth-plugin
  sudo gem install babelphish
  sudo gem install disguise
  sudo gem install uploader
  sudo gem install muck-engine
  sudo gem install muck-solr
  sudo gem install muck-feedbag
  sudo gem install muck-raker
  sudo gem install muck-services
  sudo gem install muck-users
  sudo gem install muck-activities
  sudo gem install muck-comments
  sudo gem install muck-profiles
  sudo gem install muck-friends
  sudo gem install muck-shares
  sudo gem install muck-contents
  sudo gem install muck-blogs
  sudo gem install muck-invites
  sudo gem install muck-oauth

  
  
=== Setup the database
Folksemantic requires a database installation.  We recommend MySql, but the project should also work with PostGreSQL.  Folksemantic has not been tested with other databases.
Copy config/database.example.yml to database.yml. This file contains typical database settings but you might have to change them based on your local configuration.

Run the rake tasks needed to setup and populate the database:
  rake db:create
  rake db:migrate
  rake muck:db:populate
  rake muck:services:db:populate
  rake muck:services:db:bootstrap_services
  rake muck:services:db:create_global_feeds_aggregation

If you are running these tasks on the production server you will need to add 'RAILS_ENV=production'  
  rake db:create RAILS_ENV=production
  rake db:migrate RAILS_ENV=production
  rake muck:db:populate RAILS_ENV=production
  rake muck:services:db:populate RAILS_ENV=production
  rake muck:services:db:bootstrap_services RAILS_ENV=production
  rake muck:services:db:create_global_feeds_aggregation RAILS_ENV=production

Create a default admin user.
  rake muck:users:create_admin

Then sign in to the application with:
  username: admin
  password: asdfasdf
  
If you run this task on a production server be sure to change the password.
  
=== Setup New Relic
By default folksemantic uses New Relic to monitor website performance.  config/newrelic.yml.example to config/newrelic.yml and get a get from http://www.newrelic.com.
You might also want to use their install instructions to ensure you have the latest yml file

== Where to Go Next
Now that the system is installed you can start harvesting feeds and customizing the UI.

=== Start solr
  rake solr:start
or on production:
  rake solr:start RAILS_ENV=production
  
=== Start the aggregation and recommendation system
  rake muck:raker:start
or on production:
  rake muck:raker:start RAILS_ENV=production


=== Add default feeds
You can add a set of default feeds that represent the OCW and OER community.  Do this by running:
  rake muck:services:db:bootstrap 

Start up the harvesting and recommendation system:
  rake muck:raker:start
    
Output will be logged to:
  log/raker.log file
    
Stop the system with:
  rake muck:raker:stop
    
=== Themes
Folksemantic provides the 'disguise' theme engine so that the interface can be customized based on themes.

Generate a new theme for your Rails application using the built in theme generator:

  ./script/generate theme theme_name
  
Disguise can run in two modes. The first is the default which let’s an administrator set the current theme via the built in admin interface. 
The second looks at the url of the incoming request and matches it to a theme. 
To enable this second mode create an initializer in /config/initializers/disguise.rb and enter the following contents:

  Disguise::USE_DOMAIN_FOR_THEMES = true
  
  
=== Configure languages for subdomains

